the wicked flee when no one pursues but
the righteous are bold as a lion because
of the transgression of Al and many are
its princes but by a man of
understanding and knowledge right will
be prolonged a poor man who oppresses
the poor is like a driving rain which
leaves no food those who forsake the law
praise the wicked but such as keep the
law contend with them evil men do not
understand justice but those who seek
the Lord understand all better is the
poor who walks in his integrity the one
perverse in his ways though he be rich
whoever keeps the law is a discerning
son but a companion of gluttons shames
his father one who increases his
possessions by usury and extortion
gathers it for him who will pity the
poor one who turns away his ear from
hearing the law even his prayer is an
abomination whoever causes the upright
to go stray in an evil way he himself
will fall into his own pit but the
blameless will inherit good the rich man
is wise in his own eyes but the poor who
has understanding searches him out when
the righteous rejoice
there is great glory but when the wicked
arise men hide themselves he who covers
his sins will not prosper but whoever
confesses and forsakes them will have
mercy happy is the man who is always
reverent but he who hardens his heart
will fall into calamity
like a roaring lion and a charging bear
is a wicked ruler over poor people a
ruler who lacks understanding is a great
oppressor but he who hates covetousness
will prolong his days a man burdened
with bloodshed will flee into a pit
let no one help him whoever walks
blamelessly will be saved but he who is
perverse in his ways will suddenly he
who till his land will have plenty of
bread but he who follows frivolity will
have poverty enough a faithful man will
abound with blessings but he who hastens
to be rich will not go unpunished to
show partiality is not good because for
a piece of bread a man will transgress a
man with an evil eye hastens after
riches and does not consider that
poverty will come upon him
hee-hoo rebukes a man will find more
favor afterward then he who flatters
with the tongue whoever rubs his father
or his mother and says it is no
transgression the same is companion to a
destroyer he who is of a proud heart
stirs up strife but he who trusts in the
Lord will be prospered he who trusts in
his own heart is a fool but whoever
walks wisely will be delivered he who
gives to the poor will not lack but he
who hides his eyes will have many curses
when the wicked arise men hide
themselves but when they perish the
righteous increase